MARKET INSIGHTS

The investment outlook for 2018
A difficult place to start – investing in 2018 and beyond

IN BRIEF
• The levels of key economic variables look very good. The more
troubling question centers on rates of growth from here.
• As monetary policy is normalized around the developed world,
yields should move gradually higher, pointing to the need for
flexibility in fixed income investing.
• Equity market performance in the coming year should hinge on
three variables: earnings, inflation and interest rates. Earnings are
a function of economic growth, and we expect that the healthy
pace of economic growth seen in the second half of 2017 can
continue into next year.

• We expect global economic momentum to continue in 2018,
which, combined with still low levels of inflation in the developed
world and a gradual normalization of monetary policy, is a
positive backdrop for international equities to continue
outperforming those in the U.S. in the year ahead.
• Heading into 2018, it is important to remember some time-tested
principles for successful long-term investing: cash isn’t always
king, diversification is essential, harness the power of
compounding and don’t let volatility derail you.

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

A DIFFICULT STARTING POINT
Many years ago, I remember seeing a TV commercial
promoting a well-known brand of Irish beer. A man with a thick
Spanish accent walks into a pub and asks the assembled
Dubliners if they could please tell him the way to Ail-ez-bury
Road (which local viewers would have recognized as the
location of the Spanish embassy).
Now Irish people will always offer directions, whether they
know the way or not, because it is just friendly to offer advice,
and so a variety of unlikely routes are loudly suggested to the
tourist. One suggests that he start by heading north up
O’Connell Street. Another proposes that he commence his
journey by heading west along the canal. After a cacophony of
confusion, a wiser punter gives him a brimming pint of beer
and says: “To tell you the truth, I wouldn’t start from here.”
And so he settles into the pub for the night.
Entering 2018, most American investors should feel richly
rewarded by a long economic expansion and extended bull
markets in equities and bonds. However, looking forward, they
should also recognize that this is not a great starting point and
that the very length and strength of the bull markets to this
point will limit returns going forward. This makes choosing
portfolio overweights and underweights even more important
and makes it critical that investors control their enthusiasm for
the most expensive assets.
Economic growth could pick up in the short run
EXHIBIT 1: REAL GDP YEAR-OVER-YEAR % CHANGE

Real GDP
YoY % chg:
QoQ % chg:

Average:

Expansion average:

Source: BEA, FactSet, J.P. Morgan Asset Management.
Average represents the annualized growth rate for the full period. Expansion
average refers to the period starting in the second quarter of 2009. Guide to the
Markets – U.S. Data are as of November 15, 2017.				

T H E IN V ES T MEN T O UTL O O K F O R 2 018

As seen in Exhibit 1, the U.S. economic expansion, which has
provided just 2.2% growth per year since its inception in 2009,
appeared to pick up its pace in the middle of 2017 as falling
unemployment boosted both consumer and business
confidence. Real GDP grew by roughly 3% annualized in both
the second and third quarters of 2017 and may be rising at a
similar pace in the fourth quarter, as repairing, restoring and
replacing after a tough hurricane season have added to
Our base case scenario is that this above-trend pace of growth
will continue into the first half of 2018 as lower income tax
withholding and corporate tax cuts promote increased
consumer and investment spending. However, it should be
noted that an extended delay in passing a tax act might be
more harmful than having no tax reform at all, since
uncertainty about the nature of tax cuts could cause companies
to delay investments until they receive more clarity.
More importantly, either way, economic growth will likely slow
down to a 2% or slower pace later in 2018 and beyond. The
reason for this can be found in the jobs market.
As this is being written, the U.S. unemployment rate has
fallen from a peak of 10.0% in October 2009 to 4.1% today
(Exhibit 2, next page). However, this decline in the
unemployment rate has been accelerated by very slow 0.5%
annual growth in the labor force. This, in turn, largely reflects a
wave of workers retiring, a trend that started in earnest in
2012 as the first baby boomers turned 65. An “Indian summer”
of economic growth in 2017 and early 2018 may well push the
unemployment rate down to 3.5% by late next year. However,
it is unlikely to go much lower than that given the everyday
friction and churning that occurs in the jobs market. At that
point, and barring a surge in immigration, the U.S. economy
will have to get by with roughly 0.5% annual employment
growth per year. Moreover, a lack of investment spending in
recent years has meant that output per worker has grown by
just 0.9% per year over the past decade (Exhibit 3, next page).

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

…but with unemployment near 50-year lows
EXHIBIT 2: CIVILIAN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED,

50-yr. average:

Oct. 2017: 4.1%

Source: BLS, FactSet, J.P. Morgan Asset Management. Guide to the Markets – U.S.
Data are as of November 15, 2017.		

Adding the pieces together suggests that, barring major
structural change, the U.S. will not be able to sustain growth
above 2%, never mind 3%, in the years ahead. However, we
believe that a slower expansion with slightly higher inflation
could be sustained for a few more years to come, making this
the longest expansion in U.S. history.
…the economy is supply-side constrained
EXHIBIT 3: DRIVERS OF GDP GROWTH, AVERAGE YEAR-OVER-YEAR
PERCENT CHANGE

Growth in real output per worker
Growth in workers
Growth in real GDP

’07-’16 3Q’16-3Q’17

Source: BEA, BLS, FactSet, J.P. Morgan Asset Management. GDP drivers are
calculated as the average annualized growth between 4Q of the first and last year,
excepting the most recent period. Guide to the Markets – U.S. Data are as of
November 15, 2017.

The profit picture, in late 2017, also looks good, with S&P 500
operating earnings posting a nearly 10% year-over-year gain
for the third quarter. It should be noted that this strong yearover-year gain is largely being driven by a revival in energy
company profits and a year-over-year decline in the dollar,
which has boosted overseas revenues. Earnings should
continue to look strong in the first half of 2018 but then, like
economic growth itself, earnings could come under pressure
from low top-line revenue growth and the higher interest rates
and wage costs that could accompany an economy operating at
the peak of its capacity.
It should also be recognized that the corporate tax cut
currently being debated by Congress would help boost
earnings going forward. As this is being written, the final form
of such a bill is very much in doubt. However, we know that, to
gain passage in the Senate, the total tax cuts for both
households and businesses cannot exceed $1.5 trillion over 10
years, or an average of $150 billion per year. If we assume that
S&P 500 companies get $60 billion of this, the tax cut would
amount to roughly 5% of projected S&P 500 company profits
for the next 12 months. Even this is probably an overestimate
of the net benefit to corporate profits since the tax cut would
be financed through deficit spending and so would have to be
paid for by either higher taxes or lower government spending
in some future years. In addition, the higher interest rates and
wage costs that fiscal stimulus might generate could also eat
into profits. Corporate profit growth, like economic growth,
could fall back later in 2018 following a few quarters of
excellent gains.
One of the great puzzles of the economic expansion throughout
the developed world has been the low level of consumer
inflation. In a highly competitive global economy, both wages
and consumer prices have not responded to continuous
infusions of central bank liquidity. In general, we expect this
pattern to continue in the year ahead with the Fed’s preferred
inflation measure, the personal consumption deflator, only
rising from 1.6% year-over-year growth in October 2017 to
about 2.0% year-over-year by the end of 2018. However, we
believe that excess liquidity could continue to push a wide
range of asset prices higher, boosting consumer wealth but
also raising the specter of asset bubbles.

J.P. MORGAN ASSE T MA N A G E ME N T

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

The global economy should maintain strong growth into 2018.
Europe has seen solid improvement over the past year, despite
tensions from Brexit and in Catalonia and, with 8.9%
unemployment, clearly still has plenty of capacity for abovetrend growth. Japan has also had a good year and a lower yen
could help maintain economic momentum even though
inflation is slow to respond to very low unemployment. China
will emphasize the quality of growth rather than its pace in the
years ahead but there seems little reason to fear an abrupt
slowdown. And other emerging markets should continue to
improve following the commodity slump of 2015/2016, with a
reform agenda in many countries holding out hope for more
stable growth going forward. Importantly, although global
central banks will generally be tightening in 2018, these are
the very early days of a tightening cycle when economic effects
of increases in interest rates tend to be mildest for developed
countries and emerging markets alike.
For the Federal Reserve, the economy of 2018 should provide
ample justification for further tightening (Exhibit 4). Very low
unemployment, slowly rising inflation, faster-rising asset
prices, a weaker dollar, strong overseas growth and domestic
fiscal stimulus all suggest that monetary policy remains too
loose. The Fed has already laid out a clear plan for the
reduction of its balance sheet and, barring a recession, we
expect this plan to be implemented. In addition, presuming
Jerome Powell is confirmed as Fed chair, he may be more
likely to follow the balance of opinion on the FOMC with regard
to tightening, a consensus that may be more hawkish than in
2017, given a turnover in personnel at the Fed.
…suggesting higher interest rates and slower growth later
EXHIBIT 4: FOMC AND MARKET EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FED FUNDS

Federal funds rate
FOMC year-end estimates
Market expectations on 9/20/17
FOMC long-run projection

Source: Bloomberg, FactSet, Federal Reserve, J.P. Morgan Asset Management.
Market expectations are the federal funds rate priced into the fed futures market as
of the date of the September 2017 FOMC meeting. Guide to the Markets – U.S. Data
are as of November 15, 2017.

T H E IN V ES T MEN T OUTL O O K F O R 2 018

All of this presents an interesting economic backdrop for
investors. In the ninth year of economic expansion, the
economy is in a good place with regard to the levels: high
economic activity, low unemployment, high levels of profits
and low levels of inflation and interest rates. However, the
direction of change in many of these variables looks less
positive, particularly later in 2018 and 2019, even if the
economy avoids shocks. This is why, in 2018, a more thoughtful
approach to investment strategy is essential.
— Dr. David Kelly, CFA

FIXED INCOME: PREPARING FOR MONETARY POLICY
NORMALIZATION
2017 has been characterized by strong growth around the
world. A faster-moving economy is no doubt a good thing for
investors’ portfolios, helping to boost earnings, lift sentiment
and move risk assets higher. However, faster economic growth
also presents a challenge to global central bankers and fixed
income investors.
In many ways the global economy has been like a sick patient
in a hospital. Upon admission, doctors, in the form of central
bankers, have pumped the patient full of monetary policy
medicine. With the patient now looking healthier, the doctors
must change their approach and wean the patient off of the
medicine. As anyone who has given up sugar or coffee will
know, breaking an addiction doesn’t come without its side
effects. With central banks hiking interest rates, reducing asset
purchase programs and shrinking balance sheets, there will be
some negative withdrawal effects around the world over the
next 12 months, particularly in fixed income markets.
However, central bankers are not going to make financial
markets go “cold turkey” by withdrawing monetary policy
stimulus all at once. Assuming inflation remains relatively
subdued, it is likely to be a long and gradual journey back
toward a more normal approach to monetary policy. Exhibit 5
on the next page shows the number of rate hikes and rate cuts
done by the top-10 developed market (DM) central banks since
2008. Notably, in 2017, none of the major DM central banks cut
rates for the first time since the global financial crisis; instead,
they have seven hikes among them, with an additional
potential hike from the Federal Reserve in December 2017.
Beyond interest rate hikes, asset purchase programs by two
major central banks – the European Central Bank (ECB) and the
Bank of Japan (BoJ) – are also set to slow in 2018.

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

2017 has seen a number of central banks raise rates, a
trend that should continue in 2018
EXHIBIT 5: NUMBER OF RATE CHANGES BY TOP-10 DM CENTRAL BANKS*

Source: Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Bank of Japan, Bank of Norway, Bloomberg,
Central Bank of Sweden, European Central Bank, FactSet, Federal Reserve System,
National Bank of Denmark, Reserve Bank of Australia, Swiss National Bank, J.P.
Morgan Asset Management. *Includes: Australia, Canada, Denmark, eurozone, Japan,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, U.S. Data are as of October 31, 2017.

As the rest of the world begins to normalize policy in 2018, the
U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed) will already be well along its way,
having been the first mover in both interest rate hikes and
balance sheet reduction. We believe the Fed will continue to be
relatively aggressive, raising interest rates three times in 2018
beyond the likely hike in December 2017. The Fed’s balance
sheet reduction program, kick-started in late 2017, will likely
ramp up over the course of the next 12 months, which should see
the balance sheet contract by about $400bn by the end of 2018.
As monetary policy is normalized around the developed world,
bond prices should fall and yields should move gradually higher.
As we enter this unprecedented period of monetary policy
normalization, it is important to ask: how should fixed income
investors be positioning their portfolios? First, U.S. investors
should expect a little less from their core fixed income
holdings. Since 1990, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. aggregate
index has yielded, on average, 5.0%, with an annual return of
6.2%. Over the next year, this historical performance is unlikely
to be repeated. Investors should look to clip the coupon and
brace for some small negative movements in bond prices.
With a tepid return outlook for core U.S. holdings, it will
become even more tempting for investors to search for
additional yield outside of their traditional fixed income
holdings while simultaneously diversifying. However, it is
important to be selective in this search. With the global
economic backdrop looking robust, areas such as emerging
market debt look particularly attractive, while in the U.S.,
sectors with atypical responses to rising interest rates, like
high yield and emerging market debt, could play a part in
helping to lift returns. That said, broad fixed income

diversification runs the risk of coming with increased
correlation to S&P 500 returns. This increased correlation, in
turn, has the potential to make a portfolio less diversified from
a risk perspective. Therefore, maintaining an exposure to core
fixed income remains a critical part of an investment portfolio.
In summary, the reduction in monetary policy stimulus is likely
to lead to some withdrawal effects for fixed income investors
over the next year. Central banks are likely to continue raising
rates, reducing asset purchase programs and shrinking balance
sheets, albeit gradually. Such steps are likely to drive down
bond prices and hamper the returns on fixed income holdings
in 2018. However, investors should not completely despair;
with the help of areas such as high yield and emerging market
debt, returns from fixed income holdings are likely to be
positive, just lower than history.
— Alexander Dryden, CFA

U.S. EQUITIES: BACK TO SCHOOL
For equity investors, the turn of each calendar year is much
like a student’s first day at a new school. They are excited by
the prospect of a fresh environment, which they know will be
full of new questions and unforeseen challenges, but
simultaneously a bit nervous as they are forced to leave a
world in which they had become comfortable.
At the beginning of 2017, investors were plagued by
uncertainty. How many times would the Fed hike interest rates,
and how would that impact markets? What would the first year
of a new administration in the White House bring? Would the
underperformance of growth stocks ever come to an end? How
much longer would corporate profits remain under pressure?
Profits look set to continue rising next year
EXHIBIT 6: S&P 500 EARNINGS PER SHARE

Sources: Compustat, FactSet, Standard & Poor’s, J.P. Morgan Asset Management.
Guide to the Markets – U.S. Data are as of October 31, 2017.

J.P. MORGAN ASSE T MA N A G E ME N T

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

While we now have answers to many of these questions,
investors have found themselves faced with a new laundry list
of issues for the coming year. In 2017, economic growth
surprised to the upside. Will this better-than-expected growth
continue? Will a corporate tax cut get passed? What are the
market implications of a shift in both monetary and fiscal
policy? How far can rates rise before they begin to weigh on
equity market performance?
Equity market performance in the coming year should hinge on
three variables: earnings, inflation and interest rates. Earnings
are a function of economic growth, and we expect that the
healthy pace of economic growth seen in the second half of
2017 can continue into next year. However, potential growth
for the U.S. economy remains around 2%, suggesting that the
above-trend pace we have seen should begin to moderate in
the second half of 2018.
That said, even a moderate pace of underlying growth, coupled
with a slight acceleration in the pace of inflation, could lead to
stronger-than-expected revenue growth and potentially offset
any downward pressure on margins stemming from a rise in
wages. Over time, stock prices follow earnings, and given our
expectation that the economy will avoid recession in the
coming 12 months, profit growth should continue, providing
fundamental support for equity markets to push higher
(Exhibit 6, previous page). Any fiscal stimulus in the form of a
corporate tax cut will be the icing on the cake.

There is the potential that above-trend growth, coupled with
fiscal stimulus, could lead inflation to pick up more than
expected. While there is still room for inflation to accelerate
before it comes in conflict with the Fed’s 2% target, any
meaningful acceleration in inflation could lead market-based
expectations of interest rates to re-price, potentially
undermining the low interest rate and low volatility
environment that has underpinned the melt-up in multiples
seen over the past year.
However, with earnings continuing to grow, we expect that any
volatility on the back of a repricing in interest rate expectations
should remain relatively contained. Yes, it could lead to the
elusive 10% correction investors have been searching for, but
with equities still cheap relative to fixed income and the
fundamentals looking solid, the risk of a bear market in the
immediate future seems a bit remote. The question then
becomes: at what level will rising rates begin to weigh on
equity markets? As shown in Exhibit 7 below, historically the
10-year U.S. Treasury yield has been able to rise to a level of
5% before interest rates and equity markets become negatively
correlated.

Rising rates should not be a headwind for equities, yet…
EXHIBIT 7: CORRELATIONS BETWEEN WEEKLY STOCK RETURNS AND INTEREST RATE MOVEMENTS, S&P 500, 10Y UST

When yields are below 5%,
rising rates have historically
been associated with rising
stock prices

Positive relationship
between yield
movements
and stock returns

Correlation Coefficient

Negative
relationship
between yield
movements and
stock return

10-year Treasury yield

Source: FactSet, FRB, Standard & Poor’s, J.P. Morgan Asset Management.
Returns are based on price index only and do not include dividends. Markers represent monthly 2-year correlations only. Guide to the Markets – U.S. Data are as of October 31, 2017.

T H E IN V ES T MEN T OUTL O O K F O R 2 0 18

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

The problem is that a backdrop of steadily falling rates over
the past 35 years, coupled with central bank policy that has
kept yields at artificially low levels during this business cycle,
suggests the threshold for a shift in correlations may be lower
than it has been historically. While the exact level is subject to
debate, a qualitative analysis of why rates are rising can tell us
what we need to know. If rates are rising for all of the right
reasons – namely better economic growth, more normal
monetary policy or healthier rates of inflation – equities should
continue to move higher. However, if rates begin rising for the
wrong reasons – the economy is overheating, the Fed is trying
to cool things off or inflation is getting a bit too hot – equities,
and equity multiples, will likely begin to come under pressure.
Given a backdrop of moderate economic growth, decent
earnings growth, minimal inflation and gradually rising interest
rates (from low levels), U.S. equities should be capable of
generating mid-to-high single digit returns next year. The risk
to this view stems from the fact that the U.S. is late cycle; with
the unemployment rate expected to fall further, higher
inflation and a more hawkish Fed seem inevitable.
Furthermore, as we consider the investment options available
in the coming year, economies outside the U.S. are far earlier
in their respective business cycles, and still experiencing
double-digit profit growth. Thus, with the first day of school
just around the corner, investors would be wise to choose a
curriculum that allows them to study abroad.
— David Lebovitz

INTERNATIONAL EQUITIES IN 2018: STILL CLIMBING
At one time or another, we have all sat next to a nervous flier
on a plane. They are easy to spot: the enhanced alertness to
any announcement over the loud speaker, the preoccupied
focus on the plane’s course on the map and sometimes even
the outstretched hand when turbulence surfaces. Oftentimes,
that behavior is the result of a prior bad experience on a flight,
so the concern is understandable. I have actually been that
person myself. Over time, I realized that I cannot let a previous
situation hold me back from reaching my destination or
prevent me from enjoying the ride, especially when I trust
the pilot.

After four years of international equity underperformance
relative to U.S. equities, with many worries along the way, it
makes sense that some investors are scared to board the flight
again or to relax during the journey. However, after over a year
of strong, synchronized global economic and earnings growth,
investors should recognize that the scariest part of the flight is
behind us. We are now past 10,000 feet, the moment when the
pilot allows the flight attendants to walk around, turns the wi-fi
on and tells everyone to enjoy the ride. After a tepid
acceleration in global growth in mid-2016, the global economy
picked up speed over the course of 2017 with all of the major
regions participating in the recovery. As we write this piece,
96% of major economies have a PMI figure above 50, indicating
acceleration. This has created a virtuous cycle of consumption,
earnings growth and investment around the world. We expect
this momentum to continue in 2018, which, combined with still
low levels of inflation in the developed world and a gradual
normalization of monetary policy from major central banks, is a
positive backdrop for international equities to continue
outperforming those in the U.S. in the year ahead (Exhibit 8).
2018 should be another year of strong global economic growth
and, crucially, another year of strong earnings growth as well.
Profits in several regions around the world grew at a doubledigit pace in 2017; however, investors should remember that
there is still plenty of room for them to keep climbing. While
U.S. companies have been reporting record-high earnings since
2011, emerging market earnings would have to grow by 10% to
reach their previous peak, and eurozone earnings would have
to grow by 59% to reach theirs. With the encouraging
acceleration in economic growth continuing, we can expect
these gaps to continue to close.
After years of U.S. earnings outpacing international,
a reversal is beginning
EXHIBIT 8: MSCI ACWI EX-U.S. VS. S&P 500 FORWARD EPS, USD,
JAN. 2002 = 100

International EPS growing faster

U.S. EPS growing faster

’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10 ’11 ’12 ’13 ’14 ’15 ’16 ’17
Sources: Compustat, FactSet, Standard & Poor’s, J.P. Morgan Asset Management.
Data are as of November 10, 2017.

J.P. MORGAN ASSE T MA N A G E ME N T

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

Overall, international valuations are now at average levels after
18 months of rallying markets (Exhibit 9). The plane is no
longer at the beginning of the climb, but at these levels, and
especially compared to U.S. valuations, it is tough to conclude
that we are at the end of the ascent.

While it continues to look like a favorable time for international
equities, investors should make sure they have the right pilot.
Crucially, one who is able to identify the best routes, whether
by region or by sector. We continue to favor emerging markets
and the eurozone, as well as cyclical over defensive sectors.

International at almost record cheap levels relative to
the U.S.

As we wrap up a strong year for emerging and developed
equities, investors should remember that the climb is not over.
For those nervous fliers, there is still time to put fears aside
and buy that plane ticket.

EXHIBIT 9: MSCI ACWI EX-U.S. VS. S&P 500 FORWARD
PRICE-TO-EARNINGS RATIO

— Gabriela Santos

International more expensive

CONCLUSION: FOCUS ON TIME-TESTED PRINCPLES

We conclude our year-ahead outlook by getting back to the
investing principles that hold across market environments and
truly are year-agnostic.

-1 std. dev.
from average
U.S. more expensive

’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10 ’11 ’12 ’13 ’14 ’15 ’16 ’17
Source: FactSet, MSCI, Standard & Poor’s, J.P. Morgan Asset Management. Data are
as of November 10, 2017.

Lastly, we expect the U.S. dollar to continue acting as a
tailwind to international returns for U.S. investors. We believe
we are still at the beginning stages of a long move down for
the dollar, as a result of better global growth, narrowing
interest rate differentials, more stable commodity prices and a
persistent U.S. current account deficit. This weaker dollar
environment should continue to provide a boost to
international returns in the year ahead.
2018 does have the potential for some pockets of turbulence,
whether they arise from the continued geopolitical tensions in
the Middle East and North Korea or from the several elections
occurring around the world, such as in Italy and in a multitude
of Latin American countries. However, one of the important
lessons from 2017 is that investors should not let event risks
such as elections restrain them from considering overseas
opportunities. Oftentimes, the strong underlying economic
momentum wins out. As a result, investors should not
overreact to turbulence in the year ahead, and instead pay
more attention to the destination.

T H E IN V ES T MEN T OUTL O O K F O R 2 0 18

Let’s compare two very different timekeeping devices: namely
a broken clock and a sundial. While hot, flashy investing tactics
and behaviors may work for short periods of time or when in
“favor,” – just as the time frozen on the broken clock’s face is
correct twice a day, investors should focus on tried and true
principles of investing: behaviors that build success in a
portfolio with greater consistency, like the way a sundial tells
time. While being a simple device, a sundial can consistently
and easily – barring very cloudy weather – tell you the time
with great accuracy.
The following four investing principles are timeless and their
importance holds regardless of what the growth rate of the U.S
economy is, who the Fed chair is or whatever might be going
on in China – and that is what makes them indispensable.
First and foremost, cash has and will continue to be a poor
long-term investment. Even with rates continuing to normalize
in 2018, interest rates and therefore the return on cash will not
increase enough to make the overall cash return attractive.
When we factor in inflation, we continue to get a negative real
return on cash (Exhibit 10A, next page) as has been the case
in every year since 2009. While cash has a small place in a
portfolio, we know there are enormous amounts of cash sitting
on the sidelines, almost $110,000 on a per household basis –
well above total home mortgage debt (Exhibit 10B, next page).

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

Cash earns a negative real return and yet households keep
so much of it
EXHIBIT 10A: ANNUAL INCOME GENERATED BY A $100,000 INVESTMENT
IN A 6-MO. CD

Income generated
Income needed to beat inflation

2006: $5,240

2016: $338

EXHIBIT 10B: TOTAL CASH LEVELS

Currency, $1.5

Other M2, $12.2

Money Supply (M2)

Consumer Spending

Mortgage Debt

If cash is moved off of the sidelines, where should it go? A
second principle is diversification. Being diversified has been
key for investors, and that will continue to be the case in 2018.
While in any one year a diversified portfolio is never the best
or the worst performer when we look across returns of nine
asset classes (Exhibit 11, next page), its benefit truly shows
over the long run. Over the last 15 years, a hypothetical
diversified portfolio had an average annual return of almost
7%, with a volatility of 11% – an attractive risk/return profile.
The last 15 years have been filled with all sorts of events –
wars, market crashes and natural disasters – namely, the type
of events that would make you want to bunker down in cash
and gold – and that would have been disastrous for returns.
Often diversification gets a bad wrap for not “working,” –
especially when one part of the market is roaring ahead,
leaving a diversified portfolio to lag behind, but overall, and
over time, diversification works and is a winning strategy for
long-run investors.
Diversification will be especially important in fixed income,
where a rising rate environment will mean that navigating the
asset class in an active way will be essential. Holding good
quality fixed income as the umbrella for when a storm hits and
traversing the gambit of sub-sectors in the market in a flexible
and nimble way for returns will be key.
Being diversified and increasingly selective in equities will also
be crucial. With returns in the longer term being limited by our
starting point in 2018, choosing sectors, factors and regions
will be critical for higher returns.

Source: FactSet, J.P. Morgan Asset Management; (Left) Bankrate.com; (Right)
Federal Reserve System, BEA.
Money supply and consumer spending data as of 9/30/2017. Consumer spending is
SAAR Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate data. Mortgage debt data as of 6/30/2017.
M2 includes M1 (currency in circulation and reserve balances) plus savings deposits,
small-denomination time deposits and retail money market mutual funds. Annual
income is for illustrative purposes and is calculated based on the 6-month CD yield
on average during each year and $100,000 invested. Past performance is not
indicative of comparable future results. Data are as of October 31, 2017.

J.P. MORGAN ASSE T MA N A G E ME N T

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

Diversification is a winning strategy for long-run investors
EXHIBIT 11: ASSET CLASS RETURNS OVER THE LAST 15 YEARS AND CUMULATIVE ANNUALIZED RETURN AND VOLATILITY
2002-2016

Comdty Comdty

Comdty Comdty Comdty Comdty

Comdty Comdty

Source: Barclays, Bloomberg, FactSet, MSCI, NAREIT, Russell, Standard & Poor’s, J.P. Morgan Asset Management. Guide to the Markets – U.S. Data are as of October 31, 2017.
Large cap: S&P 500, Small cap: Russell 2000, EM Equity: MSCI EME, DM Equity: MSCI EAFE, Comdty: Bloomberg Commodity Index, High Yield: Barclays Global HY Index, Fixed
Income: Barclays US Aggregate, REITs: NAREIT Equity REIT Index. The “Asset Allocation” portfolio assumes the following weights: 25% in the S&P 500, 10% in the Russell
2000, 15% in the MSCI EAFE, 5% in the MSCI EME, 25% in the Barclays US Aggregate, 5% in the Barclays 1-3m Treasury, 5% in the Barclays Global High Yield Index, 5% in the
Bloomberg Commodity Index and 5% in the NAREIT Equity REIT Index. Balanced portfolio assumes annual rebalancing. Annualized (Ann.) return and volatility (Vol.) represent
period of 12/31/01 – 12/31/16. All data represent total return for stated period. Past performance is not indicative of future returns.

All that said, why not wait for a large correction to create a
buying opportunity? Because even in the later stages of the
cycle there exist opportunities: international markets are still
climbing, while in the U.S earnings growth can support another
year of the bull run. But an even more compelling reason to be
in the market relates to our third principle: compounding.
The only way to have the power of compounding on your side
is to be invested. It’s worth noting that while compounding is a
long-run phenomenon – supporting the adage “It’s about time
in the market, not market timing” – compounding starts
working immediately, benefiting the investor over shorter time
horizons as well. The combination of opportunities in the
market and the math that compounding starts working
immediately provide persuasive reasons as to why investors
should not wait for a correction to invest.

Our last principle concerns volatility, and the value of knowing
that volatility is normal. While we do not know what events
may occur in 2018, the tide of volatility that has been out for
the last few years very well may come in. Government policy,
Fed action and events abroad all have the ability to spook the
market in different ways. Investors should not let volatility
derail their asset allocation or time invested in the market.
While sundials are not the fanciest way to tell the time and do
not work in every single instance, they have served a great
purpose, working consistently for countless people all over the
world since 700 B.C. The investing principles presented are not
as old and distinguished as the sundial, yet they have been a
critical component of successful investing throughout modern
financial history. And they will continue to be important as
investors navigate the challenges of an old expansion and
extended bull markets in 2018.
— Samantha Azzarello

T H E IN V ES T MEN T O UTL O O K F O R 2 018

A DIFFICULT PLACE TO START – INVESTING IN 2018 AND BEYOND

Dr. David Kelly, CFA
Managing Director
Chief Global Strategist

Samantha Azzarello
Vice President
Global Market Strategist

David Lebovitz
Vice President
Global Market Strategist

Gabriela Santos
Vice President
Global Market Strategist

Alexander Dryden, CFA
Associate
Global Market Strategist

J.P. MORGAN ASSE T MAN A G E ME N T

MARKET INSIGHTS

J.P. MORGAN ASSET MANAGEMENT
270 Park Avenue I New York, NY 10017
The Market Insights program provides comprehensive data and commentary on global markets without reference to products. Designed as a tool to help clients understand the markets
and support investment decision-making, the program explores the implications of current economic data and changing market conditions.
This document is a general communication being provided for informational purposes only. It is educational in nature and not designed to be taken as advice or a recommendation for any
specific investment product, strategy, plan feature or other purpose in any jurisdiction, nor is it a commitment from J.P. Morgan Asset Management or any of its subsidiaries to participate in
any of the transactions mentioned herein. Any examples used are generic, hypothetical and for illustration purposes only. This material does not contain sufficient information to support an
investment decision and it should not be relied upon by you in evaluating the merits of investing in any securities or products. In addition, users should make an independent assessment of
the legal, regulatory, tax, credit and accounting implications and determine, together with their own professional advisers, if any investment mentioned herein is believed to be suitable to
their personal goals. Investors should ensure that they obtain all available relevant information before making any investment. Any forecasts, figures, opinions or investment techniques and
strategies set out are for information purposes only, based on certain assumptions and current market conditions and are subject to change without prior notice. All information presented
herein is considered to be accurate at the time of production, but no warranty of accuracy is given and no liability in respect of any error or omission is accepted. It should be noted that
investment involves risks, the value of investments and the income from them may fluctuate in accordance with market conditions and taxation agreements and investors may not get back the
full amount invested. Both past performance and yields are not reliable indicators of current and future results.
J.P. Morgan Asset Management is the brand name for the asset management business of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its affiliates worldwide. This communication is issued by the following
entities: in the United Kingdom by JPMorgan Asset Management (UK) Limited, which is authorized and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority; in other EEA jurisdictions by JPMorgan
Asset Management (Europe) S.à r.l.; in Hong Kong by JF Asset Management Limited, or JPMorgan Funds (Asia) Limited, or JPMorgan Asset Management Real Assets (Asia) Limited; in Singapore
by JPMorgan Asset Management (Singapore) Limited (Co. Reg. No. 197601586K), or JPMorgan Asset Management Real Assets (Singapore) Pte Ltd (Co. Reg. No. 201120355E); in Taiwan by
JPMorgan Asset Management (Taiwan) Limited; in Japan by JPMorgan Asset Management (Japan) Limited, which is a member of the Investment Trusts Association, Japan, the Japan Investment
Advisers Association, Type II Financial Instruments Firms Association and the Japan Securities Dealers Association and is regulated by the Financial Services Agency (registration number “Kanto
Local Finance Bureau (Financial Instruments Firm) No. 330”); in Korea by JPMorgan Asset Management (Korea) Company Limited; in Australia to wholesale clients only as defined in section
761A and 761G of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) by JPMorgan Asset Management (Australia) Limited (ABN 55143832080) (AFSL 376919); in Brazil by Banco J.P. Morgan S.A.; in Canada for
institutional clients’ use only by JPMorgan Asset Management (Canada) Inc., and in the United States by JPMorgan Distribution Services Inc. and J.P. Morgan Institutional Investments, Inc., both
members of FINRA/SIPC; and J.P. Morgan Investment Management Inc.
In APAC, distribution is for Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan and Singapore. For all other countries in APAC, to intended recipients only.
Copyright 2017 JPMorgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved
0903c02a81fd9a37
MI-MB 2018 Outlook

